Abstracts from ADON are out for binding, so I didn't get to read what you've
done in your papers, but what is your research now that you're writing about?
Okay, well I'm looking at the way bacteria sense chemical changes in their
environment. Tape is rolling. How did you get interested in science fiction?
Well, I've always read it, I guess, ever since I was young. I've read a great
deal of many different things, and in particular in high school, I just read a
lot of it. Heinlein and then McGinn later, and so on. And I also used to write a
great deal, just for my own interest, and being interested in the sciences as
well, it was sort of a good combination. So you started writing at a very early
age then? Oh, yes. Yes, I suppose when I was around six or seven, actually, just
for my own pleasure, mostly. But then, actually, once I left college was when I
first had the idea that, gee, I bet I could write a novel. So I sat down and
wrote it one summer, actually, just before I went to grad school.
Why did you decide to write a novel first instead of short stories? well I had
written short stories actually before that um so I just never I'd never
published any of them but I guess at this time what happened was that I had
ideas that were more complex and that I wanted to use to develop characters more
than you could in a short story and so I ended up writing a novel and then I
just sent it off to a publisher at that time and actually that particular novel
has not been published but I did it was useful in that it caught the attention
of a publisher they took nearly a year to get around to reading it but once they
did they sent it back and said gee this is good why don't you maybe rewrite it a
little bit the only thing was by that time I had already started my next novel
still forms on Foxfield
In the back of Still Forms on Foxfield it says that you're a member of
the New Haven Science Fiction Writers Workshop. That's right. …did this help you
quite a bit or did you, had you already submitted your novel by the time you
joined this group or did you join the group and then get inspired to do some
sending off? Oh, I submitted it … I'd written it and send it off long before I
met them. Actually, I didn't meet them until after my first novel was accepted.
And at that time, I was able to use a lot of their comments for some revision
and improvement of the novel as it had been written. But I'd say I did most of
my original writing on my own. Once I met them, I actually found them very
useful in the publications aspect because they helped show me what you have to
do to get along with the publishers and what to look out for in the contracts
and so on. So you did write the novel before you started to graduate school.
Excuse me. The second one, actually I have to say I wrote while I was in
graduate school. Let me get you to start. I'm getting choked up here. I
swallowed something. The little button in the center. Okay. Okay. Okay. I'm
sorry, I got all choked up. Okay. I'll repeat the question. You said that you
had written the novel before you... Okay. You wrote a novel before graduate
school, and then you wrote, I take it, Still Forms on Foxfield during graduate
school. That's right. I guess once I had written the first one, I'd sort of
gotten into a habit which I couldn't break, even though I was in graduate school
and had a lot of other things to do. And I really don't... I really can't tell
you how I managed to do it, but but somehow it just sort of ended up getting
written, and then I sent it on. I would have to say that I find that the
creative enterprises really sort of help to build on each other, both science
and science fiction. You know, science fiction provides a lot of imaginative
ways of looking at things. You have to think in wildly creative ways to write
science fiction. And that's also a helpful way of thinking when you go back to
your real-life scientific problems and want to figure out how experiments might
be working and so on. So the two actually were very useful to be doing together
in a way. Okay, so you did write it during graduate school. One would assume
probably not during the first two years. You didn't do much. Is that true or did
you write it pretty much together? right through it.
It's what I used to do on Saturday nights instead of going to wild parties, I
guess. So it's a good way to let off steam, you're saying? Oh yeah, that's
right. Okay. One of the reasons I wanted to talk to you is because you're a
practicing hard scientist who writes science fiction. That's right. Do you,
among all the time, among all the many things that you have to do, writing and
doing experiments and so forth, do you have time to read very much science
fiction now? I have some time. I confess that I find myself reading a lot more
of other things other than science fiction, basically because I've always
enjoyed reading such a wide range of things. and while science fiction is very
interesting, there's so much else out there that's interesting that I find I end
up, of the time that I have to read, I end up reading only a couple books
occasionally of actual science fiction. But also I would stress that it's
extremely important for a science fiction writer to read widely of other things
from history to classical novels as well as science, of course, because that's
what breeds new life into science fiction, is getting ideas from other sources
that other science fiction writers haven't used before. For example, using
Quakers in my fiction, writing about a Quaker community, that was something that
hadn't been done before, and that, I think, sort of interested a lot of people.
Okay. That makes me need to skip down. Okay.
Okay, let me start over. The other books that you read, do you find that they
influence your style? Or obviously they give you new ideas, but what about the
style, the characterization, the format, that sort of thing? Do you pick up
anything new from reading outside the genre? Oh, definitely. I would say that
whenever I read something now, I almost automatically look into it and try to
figure out how the writer succeeds in doing certain things. And you can never
really imitate another author, I've found, but you can at least get ideas and
clues as to the basic principles of how things work. One writer that
particularly interests me is Solzhenitsyn, for instance. That's an example of a
writer who writes about science and scientists as in the first circle, yet can
also describe human feelings in ways that make it come alive for many different
readers. And I try to look at the ways in which this is done.
Okay, you said as a child you were interested in science. You read science
fiction, you still do. what's your impression of the science and science
fiction? Let's not say something like double E. Smith, but some of the more
modern stuff. Do you read it for the science content or just more or less let it
go by and are after the ways people react, or what do you have your eye on when
you read science fiction? What I have my eye on really is the interaction
between science and people. And that's the one thing that I think is the sign of
an outstanding writer is the one who can really show how science operates in
real life, not how we would like it to operate in a fantasy life. I think
Heinlein is, of course, the ideal example of that. In most of the good Heinlein
stories, he will take a look at technology and yet show the human perspectives
on it and show how ordinary people's lives are affected.
Let's see, I'm just trying to think if I can... If I come up with a concrete
example later, maybe I'll bring that up. Have you read Timescape? Oh, gosh, that
was one that I started and really didn't have time to get into. That was... That
did seem to me to be... I think that's one of the best recent examples of it. As
I say, I have so little time to get into these things. But I remember in what I
did read of it, that's the sort of book that I'm talking about, where it showed
scientists at work and how they deal with problems in society as well as in
their everyday life. It was interesting to see how the scientist actually was at
home in his laboratory and the way that book could show scientists as people
working as well as solving scientific problems. This is an aside, but do finish
it. It's really good. And I have similar feelings about it. I was just curious
that from what you were saying, that would seem to fit your category most
especially. Yeah, I think it would. but unfortunately there are relatively few
authors like that now who are really doing that. There seems to be a much
greater trend toward fantasy in what is published. I think, for example, of
Silverberg, who is probably writing very good fantasy now, but I liked his
science fiction when that's what he was writing. The Man in the Maze, for
instance, that was a book that I was very impressed with when I was in high
school, as showing a man who was essentially isolated from the world of
technology and had to face a real
crisis in that way. that's also one aspect in which religion fits into science
fiction is that both religion and science fiction often address very similar
questions about the universe they address perhaps they treat the question in
different ways but they ask how the universe is put together what it's here for
and where are we going in it and I find it often very interesting to compare the
ways in which religious and scientific viewpoints tackle these questions,
because that so often happens in our society today, too. You have led me into
the next area of questioning. You mentioned a while ago that you're a Quaker.
That's discussed in the back of Still Forms on Foxfield. It's part of the book,
which we'll talk about in a minute. Can you give me a quick run over for people,
including myself, who are not really that familiar with Quakerism? Is that the
proper reference, a way to refer to it? Basically, what are the tenets? Okay,
the Quakers believe that each person, each individual person, has a very private
and unique way of access to divine truth. Okay? And this is absolute, that
everyone has at least some way of reaching the divine truth in their own way,
and that you can't say that anyone necessarily has a better way than another
person. So the result is that Quakers don't generally have ministers, okay? That
is, at least the original form of Quakers. Some Quaker meetings do today, but
the original Quakers had no ministers. They had unprogrammed meetings. In an
unprogrammed meeting, what you do is you worship in silence. And every once in a
while, someone will be moved to speak by having a sort of revelation of a little
bit of divine truth. And this is the way the worship is carried out. And because
of this real stress on the equality and the equivalence of everyone having some
sort of access to truth, it is also believed that there must be absolute
democracy.
Pacifism is one of the tenets. Since everyone has some sort of access to the
truth, it's not right to break that line by killing someone,
the religion is basically Christian. It developed during the
Protestant Reformation. It was one of the Protestant branches. But at the same
time, it has become very universal as it has developed, and Quakers today see a
great affinity with other somewhat universalist religions, such as Buddhism, for
example. And I made that parallel in my book also, And it is also a religion
which scientists often find congenial because of the emphasis on the experience
of the individual. In science, you test the universe by making experiments.
Quakers test the spiritual universe by meditation and an inward seeking of
truth, an almost an inward type of experiment.
Still forms on Foxfield, I take it, is the first appearance of Quakerism in
Science Fiction. The first that I know of. There have been a number of great
religious works in Science Fiction so far. A canonical for Leibowitz comes to
mind, A Case of Conscience. Some people would say C.S. Lewis. I particularly
enjoyed Farmer's Night of Light. Do you think that religion has been treated
fairly in Science Fiction? We talked about the science, but what about the
religion? in science fiction? I'm disappointed that it hasn't been treated more.
I think that it has been, where it has been treated, it's often been treated
very well, and I think you mentioned some examples of that. Heinlein's Stranger
in a Strange Land is a very controversial treatment of it, but in a way, it made
people think about the issues, and that was good. But what disappoints me more
is that often writers seem to create universes in which religion does not exist
at all. You see, I think you don't necessarily have to write a book about
religion, but it seems almost dishonest to write about a world where it doesn't
exist, because it's such a prevalent part of life. And often it's prevalent in
ways that you simply don't realize. For example, I'm a scientist. My father is a
scientist. And yet, when I was little, I learned about Adam and Eve before I
learned about evolution, simply because it's such a basic part of the culture.
And a lot of us often don't realize how basic it is and how we revert to it in
times of crisis, such as a death in the family, things like that. and in science
fiction very often people are portrayed in the far future with the idea that
simply religion has died out and there is no more need for it anymore whereas I
find that to be an unrealistic portrayal it seems to me that there always will
be people who will who will need religion that it's a it's a basic part of the
human experience and that science is never going to completely replace that for
people.
Okay. Still Forms on Foxfield was the title of your novel so far. I shouldn't
say that, the one novel that has come out. Was that your title, and from whence
did it come? Okay, it was my title, And what it came from was, okay, Foxfield is
the name of the planet that was named after the Quakers settled the planet and
they named it after George Fox, who was the founder of the Quaker religion.
Still forms is a phrase that comes from a poem by Whittier, John Greenleaf
Whittier, who was a Quaker. And he wrote a poem which described the experience
of being in a Quaker meeting. and he spoke of the still forms on either side
that somehow breathe a special light. And the still forms refers to the still
forms of the people who were around him in the Quaker meeting. It's a very
curious experience, the first time you're in a Quaker meeting, to be in a room
where everyone is just totally silent, and yet you hear the breath of people as
they're breathing, and then occasionally someone will be so moved to speak
amidst that silence. And I guess I was trying to somehow capture the essence of
what that experience could be and yet at the same time show that it's taking
place on a very alien world in a very faraway place.
Okay, the book which if one were picking up with any previous knowledge one
would assume it was probably a fairly or a so called soft science book, and yet,
as it turns out, it's quite a hard science book and it also has good
characterization. And generally those two terms, not always Benford comes to
mind, but those two terms are mutually exclusive. did you try to put a lot more
effort into the science or into the characterizations or did it just kind of
flow and you didn't really think about that I would say I tried to balance it as
much as possible I would suppose that in my own life I'm so interested both in
science and in people and how they work as people that it came natural to me to
do it that way that I would write about the scientific ideas and the people and
always what interests me is the interaction between the two and so that was
basically what came out of it. again I think the book is quite an education for
those not acquainted with Quakerism because the people were very real people
they they had their problems and their passions and they seemed like real people
and I I think the stereotypical Quaker is not that real. Oh, yes, that's true.
I'm sorry, go ahead. That's all right. Okay, one thing that really interested me
in the book were your aliens. The commensals with the fractions and the
fractions using gas chromatography and NMR to detect various chemicals. Did you
conceive of the story and then the aliens, or are the aliens something that have
been lurking in your mind for a long time and you got to include them? How did
they evolve? I suppose, actually, the aliens were one of the earlier elements of
the story.
They sort of grew out of various experiences that I had in science, actually,
because, as I mentioned to you before we started the show, In my scientific
work, I've studied chemical communication among bacteria. And it was sort of of
interest to me, supposing you could have an alien intelligence that would
communicate chemically through things like pheromones, almost. How would this
work? Would it be possible? And I tried to think what kind of creatures these
might be and how they might work in different ways than our usual vertebrates,
mammals, humans, and so on. And so it occurred to me they might have developed
from plants, for instance.
They might use something akin to plant hormones. So I guess that those were
around quite a while. And then I also was getting much interested into
Quakerism, I guess, at a slightly later date. And the two things finally meshed
together. And that was really the key to the book was when I was able to combine
those two ideas, the idea of the aliens and the Quakers and how they would
interact. And at that point, that's when it became possible to move ahead with
the book. I want to ask you now, speaking as one familiar with biochemistry and
so forth, what are your feelings on the possibility of aliens on other planets,
as far as carbon-based, something like DNA, genetic code, that sort of thing?
How general do you think our type of life would be or how special is it, just as
kind of an educated guess? Well, of course, everybody has their own opinion on
that. My own guess would be that if there's one planet that has life and
intelligent life, there's probably others. It seems hard for me to imagine that
out of the entire universe, there would be only one planet on which life had
evolved.
I think the more interesting question in fact is given that given that
compelling argument that there must be others out there why is it that we
haven't heard from them? that's really what the question that worries me more
why is it that we haven't heard from them after all we're intelligent we
question about other beings and send radio signals and so on and I would hope
the reason is not that these other intelligences evolve and then destroy
themselves because of their technology evolving along with them. I would hope
that's not the reason. But I would say that's my answer to your question. Do you
think intelligence is as common as life? That's my particular problem, is just
that life I can handle, but intelligence would seem to me to be something very
special, but I know there are other opinions. Well, I would say that it's quite
possible that there are many, many planets that have perhaps lower forms of
life, okay? And then perhaps one out of ten of those planets would have slightly
more complex forms. Perhaps they'd have an environment that would make possible
a wider range of forms. And then perhaps one out of a hundred of those would
have a range approaching ours. and then perhaps one out of a great number of
those would have intelligent life.
I guess that's how I would see it because I would agree with you that there's a
big difference between being able to support a few microbes here and there and
being able to support an entire range of things like ours. But then on the other
hand, perhaps there may be planets which can support even a greater range than
that of Earth, although I admit that's hard to imagine. Let's look a little bit
in your future.
I realize you are just leaving academia and going out, but what do you perceive
as your career based on your graduate school studies and then your writing? How
are you going to juggle the two acts? Do you plan to continue you doing both or
you're just going to see what happens? Well, I think for the immediate future,
I'll try to do both, definitely. I couldn't see stopping one or the other. I
guess I'm hooked on them both. I'll be going on to do postdoctoral work in
medical research. In fact, I plan to study white blood cells and chemical
communication among white blood cells, which is something a little bit related
to that study in bacteria. So that's what I plan to be studying in science, and
I'd like to get into medical research as much as possible. But I think that I'll
continue to manage writing here and there along with that just as I have in grad
school.
Where do you see science fiction going in terms of science and religion? and
again this is an opinion, but do you think they'll treat science and religion
more realistically, or is fantasy going to take over or what? Well, I think it
really depends on which individual writers come out and are outstanding. It's so
hard to predict trends in literature because you just never know who is going to
come out and do something really fabulous. For instance, without Russa Lilligan,
what would science fiction have been? You know, it's hard to answer that
question.
I would say, I would hope to see more interest in the subject. It may be that in
the country, with the country as a whole now, since there is a lot more turmoil
about religious beliefs, that may inspire more treatment of the question in
science fiction. For instance, now you have the whole creationist debate, the
creationists who claim that science and evolution are nothing more than a
religion and therefore creationism should get equal time with religion. And that
has inspired other religious people to come out and say, oh no, that's hogwash.
You know, religion can have a different purpose and coexist with science. And
you're seeing this kind of debate more. And that may inspire a lot of interest.
Unfortunately, that seems to me that that'll inspire a lot of negative... Oh,
the literature, science fiction, will become very negative as far as religion
goes, looking at it as something trying to throw us back in the Dark Ages. I
guess that and the Ayatollah combined. But that's just my opinion. Well, that's
very possible, and it certainly won't happen if I can do anything about it. As I
said, that is a problem. But at the same time, I'm seeing members of other
religions beginning to stand up for the other side of things. At the same time,
there's a great deal of interest in religion, because people are finding out
that life
without religion, sometimes it leaves sort of a hole in their lives and they're
looking for something to replace that. And the response to that feeling can be
very negative. For instance, you have people joining the Mooney cult, you know?
And I would hope that we'll come up with some alternative to that. How do your
peers, your fellow students, your professors that know you've published a novel,
how do they treat that or treat you, receive it? Well, they receive it pretty
well, actually. They think it's a really sort of unusual thing. I guess with a
lot of curiosity. You know, it's not that common a thing to get a novel
published, and people are generally very curious, about it. My advisor reacted
by saying, well, at least you should have no problem writing your thesis. And
that was perhaps a bit of an overreaction because it's quite a different thing
to write a thesis than write a novel. Yeah. Okay. Any advice for beginning
writers? What would you tell people just starting out? Well, the most important
thing in writing is to be distinctive. And by that, I don't mean outrageous
necessarily, but to find whatever you have that is unique in your experience and
at every step of your writing try to write something that hasn't been written
before. I think people don't understand how important that aspect of writing is,
that what sounds believable and real often it is because it is so utterly
imaginative and because the reader simply has never thought of it quite that way
before, and therefore can't think that it's unreal. And that's what I've seen
from the writer's workshop and from the things by young writers, by starting out
writers that do get published. The second thing I would say is you just have to
keep submitting what you write because, now, I was very fortunate that the first
publisher I sent my novel to happened to have an editor who really liked the
idea and was taken with it. That's an unusual thing. Agatha Christie took 11
tries to get her first book published, and there are all sorts of stories like
that. So I would say those are the two main things. Try to say the ordinary in a
distinctive way, to write originally, and whatever you write, just keep
submitting it for publication. Okay, that's the end of my list. Okay. We
appreciate your consenting to interview.